# Research Proposal: Analyzing the Financial Health of Middle Market Firms
By Noah Levine, Pat Williams, Yuan Wang, Cillian Fisher 

# Research Question:
In the Merger and Acquisition (M&A) process, extensive screening is done on potential acquisition targets. Currently, this screening is done by hand through conducting a close analysis of a company's financial statements to determine whether it is worth purchasing. In the context of M&A activity in the middle market (where it is actually most prominent), these smaller companies ($1-10B market cap) often have unique structure, format, or naming convention to how they report their financials, making it difficult to standardize an analysis conducted by hand. We're specifically interested in the effectiveness and reliability of various financial metrics and valuation multiples used by investors to gauge company performance and make sophisticated investment decisions. Our overarching question addresses the need for clarity in middle market investment strategies and financial assessment methodologies across different economic sectors. 
Within this broader context, our specific research question narrows down to “For a given sector, which financial metric demonstrates the highest correlation with commonly used valuation multiples in the middle market M&A space (EV/EBITDA, FCF yield… etc)” 

# Hypothesis: 
1. For each industry, there is at least one specific financial metric that correlates strongly (greater than 0.75 r^2) with a certain valuation multiples. 
 
2. Sectors with more stable, predictable revenue streams (like utilities or consumer staples) will show stronger correlations between their multiples and steady-state financial metrics like operating margins or ROE, compared to more volatile sectors (like technology or healthcare).

*Note: We plan to curate a list of 5-10 multiples. We plan to speak with an industry professional to gather the most useful multiples in the middle market sector

# Metrics of Success and Baseline:
Since we are focused on correlation analysis, our metric of success will be the strength of the correlation coefficients (R^2 values) between stocks in a given industry’s multiples and financial metrics. A high R^2 would mean the market values that specific financial metric. Our goal will be to find correlations of similar or greater strength in other sectors,  with a benchmark around 0.75. 

# Necessary Data:
We plan on utilizing the CRSP/Compustat Merged (CCM) database to create a final dataset structured in a panel formatting, with each unit of observation corresponding to a firm-year. So for every company we plan on having in our dataset, there should be an observation for each year of the available data. The companies that we plan on analyzing are those considered to be in the middle market, which as defined by the Harvard Business Review is companies that earn between $10 million and $1 billion in annual revenue (defined as above $200 million and below $5 billion elsewhere, we will use whatever provides a more robust dataset).

This dataset should include a comprehensive set of financial metrics necessary for analyzing firm performance in the context of mergers and acquisitions. This consists of profitability ratios, liquidity ratios, leverage ratios, and efficiency ratios. The dataset may include both raw financial figures from the income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statement, as well as computed ratios and other derived metrics. Some metrics we were informed to pay close attention to are revenue growth, net income (specifically the breakdown of revenue and expenses), EBITDA, seasonality/trends, any outliers, and pro forma expenses. We were also recommended to look at all these metrics at a basis percentage or marginal level.

Initially, we would subscribe to CRSP/Compustat Merged (CCM) database in order to gather more data for our project. If possible, we will visit these websites or their APIs, thus allowing us to download the updated data files, including recent years not covered by our present dataset. This also means that if some of the financial ratios are absent from the dataset, we can compute them using the raw financial information collected from these sources. As such this method permits straight-forwardness and effectiveness in assembling information for our particular project purposes.

The raw inputs in this project mainly consist of data downloaded from the CRSP/Compustat database, primarily stored and collected in CSV formats. To better organize the data, we will conduct a coherent and clear directory. Specifically, we will first create a main folder named as CCM_Data to receive the downloaded data files, and with subfolders categorized by document types such as Income_Statements, Balance_Sheets, and Cash_Flows. Within each subfolder, we will further segregate the data into yearly folders or other relevant segmentation to facilitate easy access and systematic data handling.

To transform the raw data from the CRSP/Compustat Merged database into a refined dataset for analysis, we will implement a multi-step process. Firstly, go over all the EDA steps to clean and explore the data. This step should address issues such as missing values, duplicates, and inconsistencies to ensure the integrity of our data. The next move is calculating essential financial ratios and metrics that were not given in the raw data but are essential for thorough financial analysis. Subsequently, we may aggregate the data to a desired level (e.g., industry) to facilitate broader analysis. Finally, we will structure the cleaned and complete dataset into a panel format, ideal for the analysis.
